# Seq2Vec - DNA sequence vectorization

This too is intended to be used for Machine Learning related tasks of Bioinformatics. You can use Seq2Vec to convert FASTA or FASTQ data sets into k-mer frequency vectors. We use memory mapped files to read inputs faster and multi-worker pipeline to vectorise the sequences.

## Downloading and Compiling

You need boost c++ library to compile this. Typically `sudo apt-get install libboost-all-dev` works on linux (or `brew install boost` in MaxOS).

```
git clone https://github.com/anuradhawick/seq2vec.git
mkdir build; cd build; cmake ..; make -j8
```

## Usage
Binary will be available at build/seq2vec. Help is available with `-h` command;

```
./seq2vec -h

Seq2Vec fast sequence vectorization:
  -h [ --help ]             show help message
  -f [ --file ] arg         input file path
  -o [ --outdir ] arg       output directory
  -k [ --k-size ] arg (=3)  set k-mer size
  -t [ --threads ] arg (=3) set thread count

```

## Output

For fast processing, we create separate files for each thread. In the output directory there will be several `*.txt` files. Use command `cat *.txt | sort -n | cut -d' ' -f2- > vectors.text`. Please use a different extension since we use a wildcard input on `txt`.

We also provide a script to convert to `h5`. Read below;

## Notes

* The default k-value is 3 and usually keep it under 8.
* The generated output directory will have several `*.txt` files containing the normalized vectors. Each line starts with sequence id (index starts at 1). You can process this output as you like. We provide the helper script `toH5.py` to sort-concatenate these vectors and to create an `H5` files (for ML tasks). Usage is as follows;

```
usage: toH5.py [-h] --seq2vec-outdir SEQ2VEC_OUTDIR --destination-file
               DESTINATION_FILE

This script of Seq2Vec helps you to convert the raw output to H5. Quite
helpful in machine learning work.

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  --seq2vec-outdir SEQ2VEC_OUTDIR, -s2v SEQ2VEC_OUTDIR
                        Output directory of seq2vec containing all the *.txt
                        files.
  --destination-file DESTINATION_FILE, -h5 DESTINATION_FILE
                        Name of the destination h5 file.
```

You can find the vectors inside the `h5` file `vectors` dataset.

* You can also use the `gathered-sorted.txt` inside the **seq2vec** output folder generated by `toH5.py`. Note that each line starts with sequence id (index starts at 1). Dont forget to drop that column (use use it as pandas index).

* In linux use `cut -d' ' -f2- <SEQ2VEC OUTDIR>/gathered-sorted.txt > vectors.txt` to obtain vectors without seq ids. This can later be loaded to numpy as `np.loadtxt("vectors.txt")`.

## Using the Seq2Vec lib

You can use our sequence reader by simply adding `include` folder to your project. It is header only!

***Have a good one!* 😃**